AWS DevOps & Developer Productivity Blog

Amazon Q Developer just reached a $260 million dollar milestone

by Aytul Arisoy Cholkar on 01 AUG 2024 Permalink Share

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

To help them be more productive, developers all over the world are
turning to generative AI-powered assistants like Amazon Q Developer, the
most capable assistant for accelerating software development. While
Amazon Q Developer is great at providing code suggestions, writing new
code is one of many things developers have to do on a day-to-day basis.
Amazon Q goes well beyond writing code, helping developers with tasks
like testing, debugging, understanding existing code, finding security
vulnerabilities, implementing entire new features, and more. One of the
most time consuming and frustrating tasks is upgrading applications to
the latest version. Developers and IT teams need to modernize their
existing applications to take advantage of the latest technologies that
help them innovate faster and improve performance – but upgrade
campaigns are costly, often taking months or years to complete.

Amazon Q Developer helps alleviate toil for a range of software
development tasks using agents that are like giving developers a team to
help them complete tasks. Agents can reason and plan with minimal human
intervention, and are capable of performing complex, multi-step tasks.

On August 1st, Andy Jassy shared an exciting finding regarding the real
and quantifiable impact that the Amazon Q Developer agent for code
transformation offers IT and developer teams of any size. Amazon has
migrated tens of thousands of production applications from Java 8 or 11
to Java 17 with assistance from Amazon Q Developer. This represents a
savings of over 4,500 years of development work for over a thousand
developers (when compared to manual upgrades) and performance
improvements worth $260 million dollars in annual cost savings.

To determine the true business impact of Q Developer-assisted app
upgrades, we estimated the time saved by looking at the number of Java
dependencies we migrated. Typically, it can take a day or more of a
developer’s time to migrate just one dependency, and many applications
have dozens of dependencies that need migrating. With the agent for code
transformation, many of these dependencies can be migrated in minutes,
resulting in a significant time savings. To estimate cost savings, we
looked at the number of hosts we were able to remove from the
applications due to the performance improvements achieved by upgrading
to Java 17. Both of these estimates are conservative and our actual cost
and time saved is likely much greater.

What is the Amazon Q Developer agent for code transformation?

The Amazon Q Developer agent for code transformation automates the
complete end-to-end process of upgrading and modernizing applications,
significantly reducing the time and costs associated with transformation
projects, while enhancing application security and performance.
Developers who want to learn about how to get started with the agent can
head over to community.aws for tutorials or check out this demo:

Accelerate complex, multi-step tasks to save hours of work every day

Amazon Q Developer has an agent for software development that can
autonomously perform a range of tasks–everything from implementing
features, to documenting and refactoring code. Developers can simply ask
Q to implement an application feature (such as asking it to create an
“add to favorites” feature in a social sharing app), and the agent will
analyze their existing application code and generate a step-by-step
implementation plan. Developers can collaborate with the agent to review
and iterate on the plan before the agent implements it, connecting
multiple steps together and applying updates across source files, code
blocks, and test suites. Customers have reported efficiency improvements
of 25% faster initial development and up to a 40% increase in developer
productivity.

How can you get started with Amazon Q Developer?

Individual users can get started with Q Developer in the AWS Console,
CLI, or in their IDE on the perpetual Free Tier. Try the Pro Tier
subscription if you need to manage a team of users and policies via
enterprise access controls, to customize the code suggestions Amazon Q
Developer makes to include your internal code base, or to add higher
limits on advanced features.
