1.  Klarna

2.  Press

3.  Klarna AI assistant handles two-thirds of customer service chats in
    its first month

Klarna AI assistant handles two-thirds of customer service chats in its first month

February 27, 2024

[klarna-K.jpg]

Klarna

Klarna

[]

[]

[]

[Klarna AI-assistant]

New York, NY – February 27, 2024 – Klarna today announced its AI
assistant powered by OpenAI. Now live globally for 1 month, the numbers
speak for themselves:

- The AI assistant has had 2.3 million conversations, two-thirds of
  Klarna’s customer service chats
- It is doing the equivalent work of 700 full-time agents
- It is on par with human agents in regard to customer satisfaction
  score
- It is more accurate in errand resolution, leading to a 25% drop in
  repeat inquiries
- Customers now resolve their errands in less than 2 mins compared to 11
  mins previously
- It’s available in 23 markets, 24/7 and communicates in more than 35
  languages
- It’s estimated to drive a $40 million USD in profit improvement to
  Klarna in 2024

Klarna has also seen massive improvement in communication with local
immigrant and expat communities across all our markets thanks to the
language support. 

Available in the Klarna app, the assistant is designed to enhance the
shopping and payments experience for Klarna’s 150 million consumers
worldwide, capable of managing a range of tasks from multilingual
customer service to managing refunds and returns, and fostering healthy
financial habits. This launch marks a significant leap forward in
Klarna's vision of a fully AI-powered financial assistant aimed at
saving consumers time, worry and money, while making the global retail
banking industry more efficient and consumer-focused. Exciting new
features are already in the pipeline and will be added to the AI
assistant soon. Additionally, customers can still choose to interact
with live agents if they’d prefer.

"Klarna is at the very forefront among our partners in AI adoption and
practical application.” said Brad Lightcap, COO of OpenAI. “Together we
are unlocking the vast potential for AI to boost productivity and
improve our day-to-day lives."

“This AI breakthrough in customer interaction means superior experiences
for our customers at better prices, more interesting challenges for our
employees, and better returns for our investors.” said Sebastian
Siemiatkowski, co-founder and CEO of Klarna. “We are incredibly excited
about this launch, but it also underscores the profound impact on
society that AI will have. We want to reemphasize and encourage society
and politicians to consider this carefully and believe a considerate,
informed and steady stewardship will be critical to navigate through
this transformation of our societies.

The following key features are currently available to consumers
worldwide:

- A 24/7 customer service expert: Klarna's AI Assistant is a dependable,
  always-available resource for all customer service needs. It
  proficiently handles a wide array of queries, including refunds,
  returns, payment-related issues, cancellations, disputes, and invoice
  inaccuracies, ensuring swift and effective solutions.
- Your personal financial assistant: Klarna's AI Assistant offers
  real-time updates on your outstanding balances and upcoming payment
  schedules, ensuring you never miss a Klarna payment. It also provides
  a clear understanding of your purchase power, explaining your spending
  limits and the reasons behind them, empowering you to make informed
  and confident shopping choices.
- Multilingual chat support: Do you speak Arabic? نعم بالطبع!  And how
  about French? Oui bien sûr, comment puis-je vous aider? Wherever
  you're from and whatever you speak, Klarna’s AI Assistant is always
  ready to chat in your mother tongue – adept at handling inquiries in
  over 35 languages. 

ABOUT KLARNA
Klarna is a global digital bank and flexible payments provider. With
over 114 million global active Klarna users and 3.4 million transactions
per day, Klarna’s AI-powered payments and commerce network is empowering
people to pay smarter with a mission to be available everywhere for
everything. Consumers can pay with Klarna online, in-store and through
Apple Pay & Google Pay. More than 850,000 retailers trust Klarna’s
innovative solutions to drive growth and loyalty, including Uber, H&M,
Saks, Sephora, Macy's, Ikea, Expedia Group, Nike and Airbnb.

ABOUT OPENAI

OpenAI’s mission is to create safe and powerful AI that benefits all of
humanity.

General News

US

UK
