The AI Act is the first-ever legal framework on AI, which addresses the
risks of AI and positions Europe to play a leading role globally.

The AI Act (Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 laying down harmonised rules on
artificial intelligence) is the first-ever comprehensive legal framework
on AI worldwide. The aim of the rules is to foster trustworthy AI in
Europe. For any questions on the AI Act, check out the AI Act Single
Information platform.

The AI Act sets out a risk-based rules for AI developers and deployers
regarding specific uses of AI. The AI Act is part of a wider package of
policy measures to support the development of trustworthy AI, which also
includes the AI Continent Action Plan, the  AI Innovation Package and
the launch of AI Factories. Together, these measures guarantee safety,
fundamental rights and human-centric AI, and strengthen uptake,
investment and innovation in AI across the EU.

To facilitate the transition to the new regulatory framework, the
Commission has launched the AI Pact, a voluntary initiative that seeks
to support the future implementation, engage with stakeholders and
invite AI providers and deployers from Europe and beyond to comply with
the key obligations of the AI Act ahead of time. In parallel, the AI Act
Service Desk is also providing information and support for a smooth and
effective implementation of the AI Act across the EU.

Why do we need rules on AI?

The AI Act ensures that Europeans can trust what AI has to offer. While
most AI systems pose limited to no risk and can contribute to solving
many societal challenges, certain AI systems create risks that we must
address to avoid undesirable outcomes.

For example, it is often not possible to find out why an AI system has
made a decision or prediction and taken a particular action. So, it may
become difficult to assess whether someone has been unfairly
disadvantaged, such as in a hiring decision or in an application for a
public benefit scheme.

Although existing legislation provides some protection, it is
insufficient to address the specific challenges AI systems may bring.

- Risk-based Approach
- Compliance and enforcement
- Simplification Proposal

[]

[]

A Risk-based Approach

The AI Act defines 4 levels of risk for AI systems:

[pyramid showing the four levels of risk: Unacceptable risk; High-risk;
limited risk, minimal or no risk]

Unacceptable risk

All AI systems considered a clear threat to the safety, livelihoods and
rights of people are banned. The AI Act prohibits eight practices,
namely:

1.  harmful AI-based manipulation and deception
2.  harmful AI-based exploitation of vulnerabilities
3.  social scoring
4.  Individual criminal offence risk assessment or prediction
5.  untargeted scraping of the internet or CCTV material to create or
    expand facial recognition databases
6.  emotion recognition in workplaces and education institutions
7.  biometric categorisation to deduce certain protected characteristics
8.  real-time remote biometric identification for law enforcement
    purposes in publicly accessible spaces

The prohibitions became effective in February 2025. The Commission
published two key documents to support the practical application of the
prohibited practices:

- The guidelines on prohibited AI practices under the AI Act, which
  offer legal explanations and practical examples to help stakeholders
  understand and comply with the prohibitions.
- The guidelines on the AI system definition of the AI Act, to assist
  stakeholders in determining the scope of the AI Act

High risk

AI use cases that can pose serious risks to health, safety or
fundamental rights are classified as high-risk. These high-risk
use-cases include:

- AI safety components in critical infrastructures (e.g. transport), the
  failure of which could put the life and health of citizens at risk
- AI solutions used in education institutions, that may determine the
  access to education and course of someone’s professional life (e.g.
  scoring of exams)
- AI-based safety components of products (e.g. AI application in
  robot-assisted surgery)
- AI tools for employment, management of workers and access to
  self-employment (e.g. CV-sorting software for recruitment)
- Certain AI use-cases utilised to give access to essential private and
  public services (e.g. credit scoring denying citizens opportunity to
  obtain a loan)
- AI systems used for remote biometric identification, emotion
  recognition and biometric categorisation (e.g. AI system to
  retroactively identify a shoplifter)
- AI use-cases in law enforcement that may interfere with people’s
  fundamental rights (e.g. evaluation of the reliability of evidence)
- AI use-cases in migration, asylum and border control management
  (e.g. automated examination of visa applications)
- AI solutions used in the administration of justice and democratic
  processes (e.g. AI solutions to prepare court rulings)

High-risk AI systems are subject to strict obligations before they can
be put on the market:

- adequate risk assessment and mitigation systems
- high-quality of the datasets feeding the system to minimise risks of
  discriminatory outcomes
- logging of activity to ensure traceability of results
- detailed documentation providing all information necessary on the
  system and its purpose for authorities to assess its compliance
- clear and adequate information to the deployer
- appropriate human oversight measures
- high level of robustness, cybersecurity and accuracy

The rules for high-risk AI will come into effect in August 2026 and
August 2027.

Transparency risk

This refers to the risks associated with a need for transparency around
the use of AI. The AI Act introduces specific disclosure obligations to
ensure that humans are informed when necessary to preserve trust. For
instance, when using AI systems such as chatbots, humans should be made
aware that they are interacting with a machine so they can take an
informed decision.

Moreover, providers of generative AI have to ensure that AI-generated
content is identifiable. On top of that, certain AI-generated content
should be clearly and visibly labelled, namely deep fakes and text
published with the purpose to inform the public on matters of public
interest.

The transparency rules of the AI Act will come into effect in August
2026. 

Minimal or no risk

The AI Act does not introduce rules for AI that is deemed minimal or no
risk. The vast majority of AI systems currently used in the EU fall into
this category. This includes applications such as AI-enabled video games
or spam filters.

How does it all work in practice for providers of high-risk AI systems?

[step-by-step process for declaration of conformity]

Once an AI system is on the market, authorities are in charge of market
surveillance, deployers ensure human oversight and monitoring, and
providers have a post-market monitoring system in place. Providers and
deployers will also report serious incidents and malfunctioning.

What are the rules for General-Purpose AI models?

General-purpose AI (GPAI) models can perform a wide range of tasks and
are becoming the basis for many AI systems in the EU. Some of these
models could carry systemic risks if they are very capable or widely
used. To ensure safe and trustworthy AI, the AI Act puts in place rules
for providers of such models. This includes transparency and
copyright-related rules. For models that may carry systemic risks,
providers should assess and mitigate these risks. The AI Act rules on
GPAI became effective in August 2025.

Supporting compliance

In July 2025, the Commission published 3 key instruments to support the
responsible development and deployment of GPAI models:

- The Guidelines on the scope of the obligations for providers of GPAI
  models clarify the scope of the GPAI obligations under the AI Act,
  helping actors along the AI value chain understand who must comply
  with these obligations.
- The GPAI Code of Practice is a voluntary compliance tool submitted to
  the Commission by independent experts, which offers practical guidance
  to help providers comply with their obligations under the AI Act
  related to transparency, copyright, and safety & security.
- The Template for the public summary of training content of GPAI models
  requires providers to give an overview of the data used to train their
  models. This includes the sources from which the data was obtained
  (comprising large datasets and top domain names).The template also
  requests information about data processing aspects to enable parties
  with legitimate interests to exercise their rights under EU law.

These tools are designed to work hand-in-hand. Together, they provide a
clear and actionable framework for providers of GPAI models to comply
with the AI Act, reducing administrative burden, and fostering
innovation while safeguarding fundamental rights and public trust.

The Commission is also developing support other tools that offer
guidance on how to comply with the AI Act’s transparency rules:

- The Code of Practice on marking and labelling of AI-generated content
  selected by the AI Office. The code will be a voluntary tool to guide
  providers and deployers of generative AI systems to comply with
  transparency obligations. These include marking AI generated content
  and disclosing the artificial nature of images, and audio (including
  deepfakes) as well as text.
- The Guidelines on transparent AI systems to clarify the scope of
  application, relevant legal definitions, the transparency obligations,
  the exceptions and related horizontal issues.

These support instruments are under preparation and will be published in
the second quarter of 2026. Find out more about how the AI Office is
supporting the implementation of the AI Act.

Governance and implementation

The European AI Office and authorities of the Member States are
responsible for implementing, supervising and enforcing the AI Act. The
AI Board, the Scientific Panel and the Advisory Forum steer and advise
the AI Act’s governance. Find out more details about the Governance and
enforcement of the AI Act.  

Application timeline

The AI Act entered into force on 1 August 2024, and will be fully
applicable 2 years later on 2 August 2026, with some exceptions:

- prohibited AI practices and AI literacy obligations entered into
  application from 2 February 2025
- the governance rules and the obligations for GPAI models became
  applicable on 2 August 2025
- the rules for high-risk AI systems - embedded into regulated
  products - have an extended transition period until 2 August 2027

What is the Commission’s proposal to simplify the AI Act implementation?

The Digital Package on Simplification proposes amendments to simplify
the AI Act implementation and ensure the rules remain clear, simple, and
innovation-friendly.

The Commission proposes to adjust the timeline for the application of
high-risk rules to a maximum of 16 months. This ensures the rules apply
when companies have the right support tools to facilitate
implementation, such as standards.

The Commission is also proposing targeted amendments to the AI Act that
will:

- Reinforce the AI Office’s powers and centralise oversight of AI
  systems built on general-purpose AI models, reducing governance
  fragmentation;
- Extend certain simplifications that are granted to SMEs and SMCs,
  including simplified technical documentation requirements;
- Require the Commission and Member States to promote AI literacy and
  ensure continuous support to companies by building on existing efforts
  (such as the AI Office’s repository of AI literacy practices, recently
  revamped), while keeping training obligations for high-risk deployers
  in place;
- Broaden measures in support of compliance so more innovators can
  benefit from regulatory sandboxes that will be set up as from 2028 and
  by extending the possibilities for real world testing;
- Adjust the AI Act’s procedures to clarify its interplay with other
  laws and improve its overall implementation and operation.

All this complements actions which the Commission and its AI Office are
already taking to provide clarity for businesses and national
authorities, for instance, through guidelines, codes of practice, and
the AI Act Service Desk.

The legislative proposal has been adopted on 19 November. The European
Parliament and the Council of the EU are now discussing and negotiating
the Digital Omnibus on AI.

Quick links

Any question on the AI Act? Visit our Single Information Platform

Text of the AI Act in all EU official languages

AI Pact

General-Purpose AI (GPAI) code of practice

Impact assessment of the regulation

Study supporting the impact assessment

Questions & Answers on the AI Act

European AI Office

Governance and enforcement of the AI Act

Upcoming guidelines on the AI Act

Standardisation of the AI Act

Latest News

PRESS RELEASE | 20 February 2026

European Union endorses Leaders' Declaration at AI Summit in India

PRESS RELEASE | 17 February 2026

Executive Vice-President Virkkunen in India for summit on artificial
intelligence

PRESS RELEASE | 09 February 2026

Commission notifies Meta of possible interim measures to reverse
exclusion of third-party AI assistants from WhatsApp

PRESS RELEASE | 21 January 2026

EU supports digital connectivity with simpler and harmonised rules in
Digital Networks Act

DIGIBYTE | 19 January 2026

EuroHPC Regulation amended to strengthen Europe’s AI and quantum
capabilities

PRESS RELEASE | 15 January 2026

EU invests over €307 million into artificial intelligence and related
technologies

Browse Artificial intelligence[]

Policy and legislation

- 20-02-2026

  Leaders’ Declaration at AI Impact Summit in India

- 21-01-2026

  Proposal for a Regulation for the Digital Networks Act (DNA)

- 17-12-2025

  First Draft Code of Practice on Transparency of AI-Generated Content

More []

Report / Study

- 01-12-2025

  Study - the next data frontier: generative AI, regulatory compliance
  and international dimensions

- 12-11-2025

  Supporting the Apply AI strategy: AI Start up and investment activity
  across 10 key industrial sectors

- 28-10-2025

  Shaping and strengthening European AI talent

More []

Factsheet / infographic

- 08-10-2025

  The Commission internal use of Artificial Intelligence

- 05-06-2025

  Factsheet on the International Digital Strategy for the European Union

- 05-04-2024

  Factsheet: EU-US Trade and Technology Council (2021-2024)

More []

Brochure

- 22-12-2025

  The rise of the intelligent edge – Insights into MetaOS

- 04-02-2025

  Living repository to foster learning and exchange on AI literacy

- 04-03-2024

  Horizon Europe: new projects in AI, Data and Robotics - 2024 Edition

More []

Related Content

Big Picture

European approach to artificial intelligence

The EU’s approach to artificial intelligence promotes excellence and
trust, by boosting research and industrial capacity while ensuring
safety and fundamental rights.

Dig deeper

- [Person holding a glowing, futuristic representation of a scale of
  justice in their cupped hands. Around the scale are various
  technological icons, including data storage, cloud computing, and a
  human head outline with binary code, suggesting artificial
  intelligence.]
  - 

  Governance and enforcement of the AI Act

  The European AI Office and the national market surveillance
  authorities are responsible for...
- [Two people in a professional environment, surrounded by different
  computers and other devices, suggesting a hi-tech environment.]
  - 

  AI talent, skills and literacy

  The Commission aims to increase the number of AI experts by training
  and attracting more researchers...
- [Man with a wrench and a woman working at a laptop. A browser window
  featuring gear icons, a loading bar, and an AI brain symbol on the
  back. Symbolising AI Act standards]
  - 

  Standardisation of the AI Act

  Harmonised standards will offer legal certainty under the AI Act,
  support innovation, and position...
- [A hand holds glowing justice scales, surrounded by gears representing
  AI, technology, and innovation, symbolising the intersection of law,
  artificial intelligence, and tech.]
  - 

  AI Act Whistleblower Tool

  The AI Act Whistleblower Tool, empowers individuals to securely submit
  a report and contribute...

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last update

27 January 2026

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Print as PDF[]
