Information Security Management

ISO 42001

Artificial Intelligence Management System (AIMS)

Book Training

ISO 42001: Artificial Intelligence Management System (AIMS)

What is ISO 42001?

ISO 42001 is a new addition to the ISO family of information technology
standards, focusing on the rise of Artificial Intelligence (AI).
ISO 42001 specifies requirements for establishing, implementing,
maintaining, and continually improving an Artificial Intelligence
Management System (AIMS) within a business. It is most relevant to
organizations which are involved in:

- Developing AI Systems
- Providing AI Systems
- Using AI Systems

ISO 42001 provides a structure for establishing requirements and
controls related to the intrinsic issues revolving around AI including:

- AI Policy Establishment
- Data, Tooling, Computing and System Resources
- AI Impact and Risk Assessment
- Objectives and Processes for Responsible AI Development
- Data Acquisition, Quality, Provenance and Preparation
- Third-Party and Customer Expectations

Implementation of the ISO Artificial Intelligence Management Systems
standard (AIMS) is a recognizable way to address the concerns around AI
as it will show that your business has chosen to address these concerns
pro-actively with a time-tested strategy to manage your AI involvement
under the ISO Management System model.

Get in touch

Company size Over 100 employees Under 100 employees

Subject General enquiry Book training Request a quote for certification
/ verification

Submit

Helps you with

- Defining use-cases of AI within an organization 
- Balancing AI Governance and Innovation 
- Determining AI Objectives 
- Identifying and Treating AI Risks 
- Establishing AI Policies 
- Defining AI Roles and Responsibilities 
- Data Quality and Transparency 
- Interested Party Assurances of Responsible AI Engagement

Why is the Artificial Intelligence Management System (AIMS) important?

The use of AI has increased exponentially over recent years, yet without
much control.  As such, concerns have grown with regard to
organizations’ use of AI with respect to privacy, data protection, data
bias, and ultimately the overall transparency (or lack thereof) in AI
systems.  But AI Systems are powerful business tools that organizations
cannot ignore; so how to approach them responsibly?  
An Artificial Intelligence Management System using ISO 42001 provides
the framework and rigor for organizations to follow, based on the
internationally-recognized and proven ISO Management System approach.
 Implementing ISO 42001 controls and becoming ISO 42001 Certified
 provide an independent attestation of an organization’s responsible
development, provision and use of Artificial Intelligence.
An AI Management System is a series of interlinked elements in a
business that establish specific policies and objectives, as well as
processes to achieve those objectives.  Furthermore, the system requires
leadership involvement and on-going review & evaluation to ensure
continued conformance and improvement in its handling of AI development,
provision and utilization.

How does it do this?

An AI Management System is a series of interlinked elements in a
business that establish specific policies and objectives, as well as
processes to achieve those objectives.  Furthermore, the system requires
leadership involvement and on-going review & evaluation to ensure
continued conformance and improvement in its handling of AI development,
provision and utilization.
ISO 42001 specifies the requirements and provides guidance for
establishing, implementing, maintaining and improving an AI management
system within the context of your business.

 

Steps to Certification

1.  Step 1

    Complete a Quote Request Form so that we can understand your company
    and requirements. You can do this by completing either the online
    quick quote or the online formal quote request form. We will use
    this information to accurately define your scope of assessment and
    provide you with a proposal for certification.

2.  Step 2

    Once you’ve agreed to your proposal, we will contact you to book
    your assessment with an NQA Auditor. This assessment consists of two
    mandatory visits that form the Initial Certification Audit. Please
    note that you must be able to demonstrate that your management
    system has been fully operational for a minimum of three months and
    has been subject to a management review and full cycle of internal
    audits.

3.  Step 3

    Following a successful two stage audit, a certification decision is
    made and if positive, then certification to the required standard is
    issued by NQA. You will receive both a hard and soft copy of the
    certificate. Certification is valid for three years and is
    maintained through a program of annual surveillance audits and a
    three yearly recertification audit.

See more details

Information Security Toolkit

[]

ISO 27001 FAQs

[]

ISO 27701 Implementation Guide

[]

[]

ISO 27001 Information Security Checklist

[]

[]

ISO 27001 27017 27018 27701 Mapping

[]

[]

Integrated Quote Request Form

[]

[]

ISO 27001 in relation to GDPR video

[]

Download Certification Logos

[]

ISO 9001 to ISO 27001 Gap Guide

[]

[]

Annex SL Comparison Tool

[]

[]

Gap Analysis

[]

ISO 27001:2022 Gap Guide 2023 Update

[]

[]

ISO 27001 Implementation Guide

[]

Ready to start your journey?

We'll give you a clear indication of the costs of gaining and
maintaining certification.

Not ready yet? Call us at 978-635-9256 or request a call back to discuss
your certification requirements.
